This is a widely accepted theory, which we will discuss inmore detail in Chapter 25. The model it proposes is consistentwith many structural features of mitochondria and chloroplasts.First, rather than being bounded by a single membranelike organelles of the endomembrane system, mitochondriaand typical chloroplasts have two membranes surroundingthem. (Chloroplasts also have an internal system of membranoussacs.) There is evidence that the ancestral engulfedprokaryotes had two outer membranes, which became thedouble membranes of mitochondria and chloroplasts. Second,like prokaryotes, mitochondria and chloroplasts contain ribosomes,as well as circular DNA molecules attached to theirinner membranes. The DNA in these organelles programs thesynthesis of some of their own proteins, which are made onthe ribosomes inside the organelles. Third, also consistentwith their probable evolutionary origins as cells, mitochondriaand chloroplasts are autonomous (somewhat independent) organellesthat grow and reproduce within the cell.Intermediate FilamentsIntermediate laments are named for their diameter,which, at 8 12 nm, is larger than the diameter of micro lamentsbut smaller than that of microtubules (see Table 6.1,p. 113). Specialized for bearing tension (like micro laments), intermediatelaments are a diverse class of cytoskeletal elements.Each type is constructed from a particular molecular subunitbelonging to a family of proteins whose members include thekeratins. Microtubules and micro laments, in contrast, areconsistent in diameter and composition in all eukaryotic cells.Intermediate laments are more permanent xtures ofcells than are micro laments and microtubules, which areoften disassembled and reassembled in various parts of a cell.Even after cells die, intermediate lament networks oftenpersist; for example, the outer layer of our skin consists ofdead skin cells full of keratin proteins. Chemical treatmentsthat remove micro laments and microtubules from the cytoplasmof living cells leave a web of intermediate lamentsthat retains its original shape. Such experiments suggest thatintermediate laments are especially sturdy and that theyplay an important role in reinforcing the shape of a cell andxing the position of certain organelles. For instance, the nucleustypically sits within a cage made of intermediate laments,xed in location by branches of the laments thatextend into the cytoplasm. Other intermediate lamentsmake up the nuclear lamina, which lines the interior of thenuclear envelope (see Figure 6.9). By supporting a cell sshape, intermediate laments help the cell carry out its specic function. For example, the long extensions (axons) ofnerve cells that transmit impulses are strengthened by intermediatelaments. Thus, the various kinds of intermediatelaments may function together as the permanent frameworkof the entire cell.Cell Walls of PlantsThe cell wall is an extracellular structure of plant cells thatdistinguishes them from animal cells (see Figure 6.8). Thewall protects the plant cell, maintains its shape, and preventsexcessive uptake of water. On the level of the whole plant,the strong walls of specialized cells hold the plant up againstthe force of gravity. Prokaryotes, fungi, and some protists alsohave cell walls, as you saw in Figures 6.5 and 6.8, but we willpostpone discussion of them until Unit Five.Plant cell walls are much thicker than the plasma membrane,ranging from 0.1 m to several micrometers. Theexact chemical composition of the wall varies from species tospecies and even from one cell type to another in the sameplant, but the basic design of the wall is consistent. Micro brilsmade of the polysaccharide cellulose (see Figure 5.8) aresynthesized by an enzyme called cellulose synthase and secretedto the extracellular space, where they become embeddedin a matrix of other polysaccharides and proteins. Thiscombination of materials, strong bers in a ground substance(matrix), is the same basic architectural design foundin steel-reinforced concrete and in berglass.A young plant cell rst secretes a relatively thin and exiblewall called the primary cell wall (Figure 6.28). In activelyselective permeability; that is, it allows some substances tocross it more easily than others. One of the earliest episodes inthe evolution of life may have been the formation of a membranethat enclosed a solution different from the surroundingsolution while still permitting the uptake of nutrients andelimination of waste products. The ability of the cell to discriminatein its chemical exchanges with its environment isfundamental to life, and it is the plasma membrane and itscomponent molecules that make this selectivity possible.In this chapter, you will learn how cellular membranes controlthe passage of substances. The image in Figure 7.1 showsthe elegant structure of a eukaryotic plasma membrane proteinthat plays a crucial role in nerve cell signaling. This proteinprovides a channel for a stream of potassium ions (K*) toexit a nerve cell at a precise moment after nerve stimulation,restoring the cell s ability to re again. (The orange ball in thecenter represents one potassium ion moving through thechannel.) In this way, the plasma membrane and its proteinsnot only act as an outer boundary but also enable the cell tocarry out its functions. The same applies to the many varietiesof internal membranes that partition the eukaryotic cell: Themolecular makeup of each membrane allows compartmentalizedspecialization in cells. To understand how membraneswork, we ll begin by examining their architectureAnd some membrane proteins seem to move in a highly directedmanner, perhaps driven along cytoskeletal bers bymotor proteins connected to the membrane proteins cytoplasmicregions. However, many other membrane proteinsseem to be held immobile by their attachment to the cytoskeletonor to the extracellular matrix (see Figure 7.5).A membrane remains uid as temperature decreases untilnally the phospholipids settle into a closely packed arrangementand the membrane solidi es, much as bacon greaseforms lard when it cools. The temperature at which a membranesolidi es depends on the types of lipids it is made of.The membrane remains uid to a lower temperature if it isrich in phospholipids with unsaturated hydrocarbon tails (seeFigures 5.11 and 5.12). Because of kinks in the tails wheredouble bonds are located, unsaturated hydrocarbon tails cannotpack together as closely as saturated hydrocarbon tails,and this makes the membrane more uid (Figure 7.8a).The steroid cholesterol, which is wedged between phospholipidmolecules in the plasma membranes of animal cells, hasdifferent effects on membrane uidity at different temperatures(Figure 7.8b). At relatively high temperatures at 37 C, thebody temperature of humans, for example cholesterol makesthe membrane less uid by restraining phospholipid movement.However, because cholesterol also hinders the close packingof phospholipids, it lowers the temperature required for themembrane to solidify. Thus, cholesterol can be thought of as auidity buffer for the membrane, resisting changes in membraneuidity that can be caused by changes in temperature.Membranes must be uid to work properly; they are usuallyabout as uid as salad oil. When a membrane solidi es, He took his time about it. Wooden sawhorses blocked the road at each end of the Radley lot, straw was put down on the sidewalk, traffic was diverted to the back street. Dr. Reynolds parked his car in front of our house and walked to the Radley’s every time he called. Jem and I crept around the yard for days. At last the sawhorses were taken away, and we stood watching from the front porch when Mr. Radley made his final journey past our house. “There goes the meanest man ever God blew breath into,” murmured Calpurnia, and she spat meditatively into the yard. We looked at her in surprise, for Calpurnia rarely commented on the ways of white people. The neighborhood thought when Mr. Radley went under Boo would come out, but it had another think coming: Boo’s elder brother returned from Pensacola and took Mr. Radley’s place. The only difference between him and his father was their ages. Jem said Mr. Nathan Radley “bought cotton,” too. Mr. Nathan would speak to us, however, when we said good morning, and sometimes we saw him coming from town with a magazine in his hand. The more we told Dill about the Radleys, the more he wanted to know, the longer he would stand hugging the light-pole on the corner, the more he would wonder. “Wonder what he does in there,” he would murmur. “Looks like he’d just stick his head out the door.” Jem said, “He goes out, all right, when it’s pitch dark. Miss Stephanie Crawford said she woke up in the middle of the night one time and saw him looking straight through the window at her... said his head was like a skull lookin’ at her. Ain’t you ever waked up at night and heard him, Dill? He walks like this—” Jem slid his feet through the gravel. “Why do you think Miss Rachel locks up so tight at night? I’ve seen his tracks in our back yard many a mornin’, and one night I heard him scratching on the back screen, but he was gone time Atticus got there.” “Wonder what he looks like?” said Dill. Jem gave a reasonable description of Boo: Boo was about six-anda-half feet tall, judging from his tracks; he dined on raw squirrels and any cats he could catch, that’s why his hands were bloodstained—if you ate an animal raw, you could never wash the blood off. There was a long jagged scar that ran across his face; what teeth he had were yellow and rotten; his eyes popped, and he drooled most of the time. “Let’s try to make him come out,” said Dill. “I’d like to see what he looks like.” Jem said if Dill wanted to get himself killed, all he had to do was go up and knock on the front door. Our first raid came to pass only because Dill bet Jem The Gray Ghost against two Tom Swifts that Jem wouldn’t get any farther than the Radley gate. In all his life, Jem had never declined a dare. Jem thought about it for three days. I suppose he loved honor more than his head, for Dill wore him down easily: “You’re scared,” Dill said, the first day. “Ain’t scared, just respectful,” Jem said. The next day Dill said, “You’re too scared even to put your big toe in the front yard.” Jem said he reckoned he wasn’t, he’d passed the Radley Place every school day of his life. “Always runnin’,” I said. But Dill got him the third day, when he told Jem that folks in Meridian certainly weren’t as afraid as the folks in Maycomb, that he’d never seen such scary folks as the ones in Maycomb. This was enough to make Jem march to the corner, where he stopped and leaned against the light-pole, watching the gate hanging crazily on its homemade hinge. “I hope you’ve got it through your head that he’ll kill us each and every one, Dill Harris,” said Jem, when we joined him. “Don’t blame me when he gouges your eyes out. You started it, remember.” “You’re still scared,” murmured Dill patiently. Jem wanted Dill to know once and for all that he wasn’t scared of anything: “It’s just that I can’t think of a way to make him come out without him gettin’ us.” Besides, Jem had his little sister to think of. When he said that, I knew he was afraid. Jem had his little sister to think of the time I dared him to jump off the top of the house: “If I got killed, what’d become of you?” he asked. Then he jumped, landed unhurt, and his sense of responsibility left him until confronted by the Radley Place. “You gonna run out on a dare?” asked Dill. “If you are, then—” “Dill, you have to think about these things,” Jem said. “Lemme think a minute... it’s sort of like making a turtle come out...” “How’s that?” asked Dill.“Strike a match under him.” I told Jem if he set fire to the Radley house I was going to tell Atticus on him. Dill said striking a match under a turtle was hateful. “Ain’t hateful, just persuades him—‘s not like you’d chunk him in the fire,” Jem growled. “How do you know a match don’t hurt him?” “Turtles can’t feel, stupid,” said Jem. “Were you ever a turtle, huh?” “My stars, Dill! Now lemme think... reckon we can rock him....” Jem stood in thought so long that Dill made a mild concession: “I won’t say you ran out on a dare an’ I’ll swap you The Gray Ghost if you just go up and touch the house.” Jem brightened. “Touch the house, that all?” Dill nodded. “Sure that’s all, now? I don’t want you hollerin’ something different the minute I get back.” “Yeah, that’s all,” said Dill. “He’ll probably come out after you when he sees you in the yard, then Scout’n’ me’ll jump on him and hold him down till we can tell him we ain’t gonna hurt him.” We left the corner, crossed the side street that ran in front of the Radley house, and stopped at the gate. “Well go on,” said Dill, “Scout and me’s right behind you.” “I’m going,” said Jem, “don’t hurry me.” He walked to the corner of the lot, then back again, studying the simple terrain as if deciding how best to effect an entry, frowning and scratching his head. Then I sneered at him. Jem threw open the gate and sped to the side of the house, slapped it with his palm and ran back past us, not waiting to see if his foray was successful. Dill and I followed on his heels. Safely on our porch, panting and out of breath, we looked back. The old house was the same, droopy and sick, but as we stared down the street we thought we saw an inside shutter move. Flick. A tiny, almost invisible movement, and the house was still. 2 Dill left us early in September, to return to Meridian. We saw him off on the five o’clock bus and I was miserable without him until it occurred to me that I would be starting to school in a week. I never looked forward more to anything in my life. Hours of wintertime had found me in the treehouse, looking over at the schoolyard, spying on multitudes of children through a two-power telescope Jem had given me, learning their games, following Jem’s red jacket through wriggling circles of blind man’s buff, secretly sharing their misfortunes and minor victories. I longed to join them. Jem condescended to take me to school the first day, a job usually done by one’s parents, but Atticus had said Jem would be delighted to show me where my room was. I think some money changed hands in this transaction, for as we trotted around the corner past the Radley Place I heard an unfamiliar jingle in Jem’s pockets. When we slowed to a walk at the edge of the schoolyard, Jem was careful to explain that during school hours I was not to bother him, I was not to approach him with requests to enact a chapter of Tarzan and the Ant Men, to embarrass him with references to his private life, or tag along behind him at recess and noon. I was to stick with the first grade and he would stick with the fifth. In short, I was to leave him alone. “You mean we can’t play any more?” I asked. “We’ll do like we always do at home,” he said, “but you’ll seeschool’s different.” It certainly was. Before the first morning was over, Miss Caroline Fisher, our teacher, hauled me up to the front of the room and patted the palm of my hand with a ruler, then made me stand in the corner until noon. Miss Caroline was no more than twenty-one. She had bright auburn hair, pink cheeks, and wore crimson fingernail polish. She also wore high-heeled pumps and a red-and-white-striped dress. She looked and smelled like a peppermint drop. She boarded across the street one door down from us in Miss Maudie Atkinson’s upstairs front room, and when Miss Maudie introduced us to her, Jem was in a haze for days. Miss Caroline printed her name on the blackboard and said, “This says I am Miss Caroline Fisher. I am from North Alabama, from Winston County.” The class murmured apprehensively, should she prove to harbor her share of the peculiarities indigenous to that region. (When Alabama seceded from the Union on January 11, 1861, Winston County seceded from Alabama, and every child in Maycomb County knew it.) North Alabama was full of Liquor Interests, Big Mules, steel companies, Republicans, professors, and other persons of no background. Miss Caroline began the day by reading us a story about cats. The cats had long conversations with one another, they wore cunning little clothes and lived in a warm house beneath a kitchen stove. By the time Mrs. Cat called the drugstore for an order of chocolate malted mice the class was wriggling like a bucketful of catawba worms. Miss Caroline seemed unaware that the ragged, denim-shirted and floursack-skirted first grade, most of whom had chopped cotton and fed hogs from the time they were able to walk, were immune to imaginative literature. Miss Caroline came to the end of the story and said, “Oh, my, wasn’t that nice?” Then she went to the blackboard and printed the alphabet in enormous square capitals, turned to the class and asked, “Does anybody know what these are?” Everybody did; most of the first grade had failed it last year. I suppose she chose me because she knew my name; as I read the alphabet a faint line appeared between her eyebrows, and after making me read most of My First Reader and the stock-market quotations from The Mobile Register aloud, she discovered that I was literate and looked at me with more than faint distaste. Miss Caroline told me to tell my father not to teach me any more, it would interfere with my reading. “Teach me?” I said in surprise. “He hasn’t taught me anything, Miss Caroline. Atticus ain’t got time to teach me anything,” I added, when Miss Caroline smiled and shook her head. “Why, he’s so tired at night he just sits in the livingroom and reads.” “If he didn’t teach you, who did?” Miss Caroline asked goodnaturedly. “Somebody did. You weren’t born reading The Mobile Register.” “Jem says I was. He read in a book where I was a Bullfinch instead of a Finch. Jem says my name’s really Jean Louise Bullfinch, that I got swapped when I was born and I’m really a—” Miss Caroline apparently thought I was lying. “Let’s not let our imaginations run away with us, dear,” she said. “Now you tell your father not to teach you any more. It’s best to begin reading with a fresh mind. You tell him I’ll take over from here and try to undo the damage—” “Ma’am?” “Your father does not know how to teach. You can have a seat now.” I mumbled that I was sorry and retired meditating upon my crime. I never deliberately learned to read, but somehow I had been wallowing illicitly in the daily papers. In the long hours of church—was it then I learned? I could not remember not being able to read hymns. Now that I was compelled to think about it, reading was something that just came to me, as learning to fasten the seat of my union suit without looking around, or achieving two bows from a snarl of shoelaces. I could not remember when the lines above Atticus’s moving finger separated into words, but I had stared at them all the evenings in my memory, listening to the news of the day, Bills to Be Enacted into Laws, the diaries of Lorenzo Dow—anything Atticus happened to be reading when I crawled into his lap every night. Until I feared I would lose it, I never loved to read. One does not love breathing. I knew I had annoyed Miss Caroline, so I let well enough alone and stared out the window until recess when Jem cut me from the covey of first-graders in the schoolyard. He asked how I was getting along. I told him. “If I didn’t have to stay I’d leave. Jem, that damn lady says Atticus’s been teaching me to read and for him to stop it—” “Don’t worry, Scout,” Jem comforted me. “Our teacher says Miss Caroline’s introducing a new way of teaching. She learned about it in college. It’ll be in all the grades soon. You don’t have to learn much out of books that way—it’s like if you wanta learn about cows, you go milk one, see?” “Yeah Jem, but I don’t wanta study cows, I—” “Sure you do. You hafta know about cows, they’re a big part of life in Maycomb County.” I contented myself with asking Jem if he’d lost his mind. “I’m just trying to tell you the new way they’re teachin’ the first grade, stubborn. It’s the Dewey Decimal System.” Having never questioned Jem’s pronouncements, I saw no reason to begin now. 